resource_control: add runaway queries (#13929)
pingcap/docs: tidb-resource-control.md

SELECT /*+ RESOURCE_GROUP(rg1) */ * FROM t limit 10;
```

### Manage queries that consume more resources than expected (Runaway Queries)

> **Warning:**
>
> This feature is an experimental feature. It is not recommended that you use it in the production environment. This feature might be changed or removed without prior notice. If you find a bug, you can report an [issue](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues) on GitHub.

A runaway query is a query that takes excessive time or resources than expected. Starting from TiDB v7.2.0, the resource control feature introduces the management of runaway queries. You can set criteria for a resource group to identify runaway queries and automatically take actions to prevent them from exhausting resources and affecting other queries.

You can manage runaway queries for a resource group by configuring the `QUERY_LIMIT` field in [`CREATE RESOURCE GROUP`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-create-resource-group.md) or [`ALTER RESOURCE GROUP`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-alter-resource-group.md).

#### `QUERY_LIMIT` parameters

> Supported condition setting (`ACTION`):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Supported condition setting:
```

- `EXEC_ELAPSED`: a query is identified as a runaway query when the query execution time exceeds this limit.

> Supported operations:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Supported operations (`ACTION`):
```

- `DRYRUN`: no action is taken. The records are appended for the runaway queries. This is mainly used to observe whether the condition setting is reasonable.
- `COOLDOWN`: the execution priority of the query is lowered to the lowest level. The query continues to execute with the lowest priority and does not occupy resources of other operations.
- `KILL`: the identified query is automatically terminated and reports an error `Query execution was interrupted, identified as runaway query`.

> To avoid too many concurrent runaway queries that exhaust system resources before being identified by conditions, the resource control feature introduces an immunity mechanism for quick identification. By using the `WATCH` clause, when a query is identified as a runaway query, the current TiDB instance marks the matching queries as runaway queries immediately in the next period of time (defined by `DURATION`), and takes the corresponding actions, instead of waiting for them to be identified by conditions. The `KILL` operation reports an error `Quarantined and interrupted because of being in runaway watch list`.

Author: ```suggestion
To avoid too many concurrent runaway queries that exhaust system resources before being identified by conditions, the resource control feature introduces a quick identification mechanism for quick identification. By using the `WATCH` clause, when a query is identified as a runaway query, the current TiDB instance marks the matching queries as runaway queries immediately in the next period of time (defined by `DURATION`), and takes the corresponding actions, instead of waiting for them to be identified by conditions. The `KILL` operation reports an error `Quarantined and interrupted because of being in runaway watch list`.
```

There are two methods for `WATCH` to match for rapid identification:

> - `EXACT` indicates that only SQL statements with exactly the same SQL are quickly identified.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `EXACT` indicates that only SQL statements with exactly the same SQL text are quickly identified.
```

> - `SIMILAR` indicates all SQL statements with the same pattern are matched by Plan Digest despite literal values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `SIMILAR` indicates all SQL statements with the same pattern are matched by Plan Digest, and the literal values are ignored.
```

The parameters of `QUERY_LIMIT` are as follows:

| Parameter          | Description            | Note                                  |
|---------------|--------------|--------------------------------------|
| `EXEC_ELAPSED`  | When the query execution time exceeds this value, it is identified as a runaway query | EXEC_ELAPSED =`60s` means the query is identified as a runaway query if it takes more than 60 seconds to execute. |
| `ACTION`    | Action taken when a runaway query is identified | The optional values are `DRYRUN`, `COOLDOWN`, and `KILL`. |

> | `WATCH`   | Quickly match the identified runaway query. If the same or similar query is encountered again within a certain period of time and the corresponding action is performed immediately. | Optional. For example, `WATCH=SIMILAR DURATION '60s'` and `WATCH=EXACT DURATION '1m'`. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `WATCH`   | Quickly match the identified runaway query. If the same or similar query is encountered again within a certain period of time, the corresponding action is performed immediately. | Optional. For example, `WATCH=SIMILAR DURATION '60s'` and `WATCH=EXACT DURATION '1m'`. |
```

    ```

2. Change the `rg1` resource group to terminate the runaway queries, and mark the queries with the same pattern as runaway queries immediately in the next 10 minutes.

    ```sql
    ALTER RESOURCE GROUP rg1 QUERY_LIMIT=(EXEC_ELAPSED='60s', ACTION=KILL, WATCH=SIMILAR DURATION='10m');
    ```

3. Change the `rg1` resource group to cancel the runaway query check.

    ```sql
    ALTER RESOURCE GROUP rg1 QUERY_LIMIT=NULL;
    ```

#### Observability

You can get more information about runaway queries from the following system tables:

+ The `mysql.tidb_runaway_queries` table contains the history records of all runaway queries identified in the past 7 days. Take one of the rows as an example:

    ```sql
    MySQL [(none)]> SELECT * FROM mysql.tidb_runaway_queries LIMIT 1\G;
    *************************** 1. row ***************************
    resource_group_name: rg1
                   time: 2023-06-16 17:40:22
             match_type: identify
                 action: kill
           original_sql: select * from sbtest.sbtest1
            plan_digest: 5b7d445c5756a16f910192ad449c02348656a5e9d2aa61615e6049afbc4a82e
            tidb_server: 127.0.0.1:4000
    ```

>     In which `match_type` indicates how the runaway query is identified. The value can one of the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    In which `match_type` indicates how the runaway query is identified. The value can be one of the following:
```

>     In which `match_type` indicates how the runaway query is identified. The value can be one of the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    In the preceding output,`match_type` indicates how the runaway query is identified. The value can be one of the following:
```

    - `identify` means that it matches the condition of the runaway query.

>     - `watch` means that it matches the watch rules and is put into the watch list.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - `watch` means that it matches the watch rule in the watch list.
```

>     - `watch` means that it matches the watch rule in the watch list.

Author: ```suggestion
    - `watch` means that it matches the quick identification rule in the watch list.
```

> + The `mysql.tidb_runaway_quarantined_watch` table contains the watch rule records for runaway queries. Take two of these rows as examples:

Author: ```suggestion
+ The `mysql.tidb_runaway_quarantined_watch` table contains the quick identification rule records for runaway queries. Take two of these rows as examples:
```

    ```sql
    MySQL [(none)]> SELECT * FROM mysql.tidb_runaway_quarantined_watch LIMIT 2\G;
    *************************** 1. row ***************************
    resource_group_name: rg1
             start_time: 2023-06-16 17:40:22
               end_time: 2023-06-16 18:10:22
                  watch: similar
             watch_text: 5b7d445c5756a16f910192ad449c02348656a5e9d2aa61615e6049afbc4a82e
            tidb_server: 127.0.0.1:4000
    *************************** 2. row ***************************
    resource_group_name: rg1
             start_time: 2023-06-16 17:42:35
               end_time: 2023-06-16 18:12:35
                  watch: exact
             watch_text: select * from sbtest.sbtest1
            tidb_server: 127.0.0.1:4000
    ```

>     In which:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    In the preceding output:
```

    - `start_time` and `end_time` indicate the time range during which the watch list is valid.

>     - `watch` means that it is put into the watch list. The value can be one of the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - `watch` means that the query matches the watch rule in the watch list. The value can be one of the following:
```

>     - `watch` means that the query matches the watch rule in the watch list. The value can be one of the following:

Author: ```suggestion
    - `watch` means that the query matches the quick identification rule in the watch list. The value can be one of the following:
```

| `ACTION`    | Action taken when a runaway query is identified | The optional values are `DRYRUN`, `COOLDOWN`, and `KILL`. |
| `WATCH`   | Quickly match the identified runaway query. If the same or similar query is encountered again within a certain period of time and the corresponding action is performed immediately. | Optional. For example, `WATCH=SIMILAR DURATION '60s'` and `WATCH=EXACT DURATION '1m'`. |

#### Examples

1. Create a resource group `rg1` with a quota of 500 RUs per second, and define a runaway query as one that exceeds 60 seconds, and lower the priority of the runaway query.

    ```sql
    CREATE RESOURCE GROUP IF NOT EXISTS rg1 RU_PER_SEC = 500 QUERY_LIMIT=(EXEC_ELAPSED='60s', ACTION=COOLDOWN);
    ```

2. Change the `rg1` resource group to terminate the runaway queries, and mark the queries with the same pattern as runaway queries immediately in the next 10 minutes.

    ```sql
    ALTER RESOURCE GROUP rg1 QUERY_LIMIT=(EXEC_ELAPSED='60s', ACTION=KILL, WATCH=SIMILAR DURATION='10m');
    ```

3. Change the `rg1` resource group to cancel the runaway query check.

    ```sql
    ALTER RESOURCE GROUP rg1 QUERY_LIMIT=NULL;
    ```

#### Observability

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

You can get more information about runaway queries from the following system tables:

> + The `mysql.tidb_runaway_queries` table contains the history of all runaway queries identified in the past certain period of time. Take one of the rows as an example:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
+ The `mysql.tidb_runaway_queries` table contains the history of all runaway queries identified in the past 7 days. Take one of the rows as an example:
```

> + The `mysql.tidb_runaway_queries` table contains the history of all runaway queries identified in the past certain period of time. Take one of the rows as an example:

Author: ```suggestion
+ The `mysql.tidb_runaway_queries` table contains the history of all runaway queries identified in the past 7 days. Take one of the rows as an example:
```

    ```sql
    CREATE RESOURCE GROUP IF NOT EXISTS rg1 RU_PER_SEC = 500 QUERY_LIMIT=(EXEC_ELAPSED='60s', ACTION=COOLDOWN);
    ```

2. Change the `rg1` resource group to terminate the runaway queries directly, and mark the queries with the same pattern as runaway aueries directly in the next 10 minutes.

    ```sql
    ALTER RESOURCE GROUP rg1 QUERY_LIMIT=(EXEC_ELAPSED='60s', ACTION=KILL, WATCH=SIMILAR DURATION='10m');
    ```

3. Change the `rg1` resource group to cancel the runaway query check.

    ```sql
    ALTER RESOURCE GROUP rg1 QUERY_LIMIT=NULL;
    ```

#### Observability

TiDB collects runtime information about TTL regularly and provides visual charts of the metrics in the Grafana dashboard. You can view the data in the **TiDB** > **TTL** dashboard. For more details, see [TiDB Important Monitoring Metrics](/grafana-tidb-dashboard.md#ttl).

You can get more information about runaway queries from the following system tables:

+ The `mysql.tidb_runaway_queries` table contains the history of all runaway queries identified in the past certain period of time. Take one of the rows as an example:

    ```sql

>     MySQL [(none)]> SELECT * FROM tidb_runaway_queries LIMIT 1\G;

Author: ```suggestion
    MySQL [(none)]> SELECT * FROM mysql.tidb_runaway_queries LIMIT 1\G;
```

    *************************** 1. row ***************************
    resource_group_name: rg1
                   time: 2023-06-16 17:40:22
             match_type: identify
                 action: kill
           original_sql: select * from sbtest.sbtest1
            plan_digest: 5b7d445c5756a16f910192ad449c02348656a5e9d2aa61615e6049afbc4a82e
            tidb_server: 127.0.0.1:4000
    ```

    In which:

    - `match_type` is the source of the runaway query.
    - `identify` means that it matches the condition of the runaway query.

>     - `watch` means that it is put into the watch list.

Author: watch 是否要删掉

Reviewer 4: 它们是 match type 的一种，不应该跟 matchc type 并列

SELECT /*+ RESOURCE_GROUP(rg1) */ * FROM t limit 10;
```

### Manage queries that consume more resources than expected (Runaway Queries)

> **Warning:**
>
> This feature is an experimental feature. It is not recommended that you use it in the production environment. This feature might be changed or removed without prior notice. If you find a bug, you can report an [issue](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues) on GitHub.

> A runaway query is a query that takes longer to execute or consumes more resources than expected. Starting from TiDB v7.2.0, the resource control feature introduces the management of runaway queries. You can set conditions for a resource group to identify runaway queries and automatically take actions to prevent them from exhausting resources and affecting normal queries.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
A runaway query is a query that takes excessive time or resources than expected. Starting from TiDB v7.2.0, the resource control feature introduces the management of runaway queries. You can set criteria for a resource group to identify runaway queries and automatically take actions to prevent them from exhausting resources and affecting other queries.
```

You can manage runaway queries for a resource group by configuring the `QUERY_LIMIT` field in [`CREATE RESOURCE GROUP`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-create-resource-group.md) or [`ALTER RESOURCE GROUP`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-alter-resource-group.md).

#### `QUERY_LIMIT` parameters

Supported condition setting:

- `EXEC_ELAPSED`: a query is identified as a runaway query when the query execution time exceeds this limit.

Supported operations:

> - `DRYRUN`: no action is taken. This is mainly used to observe whether the condition setting is reasonable.

Author: ```suggestion
- `DRYRUN`: no action is taken for the executed query. Only record the identified runaway queries. This is mainly used to observe whether the condition setting is reasonable.
```

> - `DRYRUN`: no action is taken for the executed query. Only record the identified runaway queries. This is mainly used to observe whether the condition setting is reasonable.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- `DRYRUN`: no action is taken. The records are appended for the runaway queries. This is mainly used to observe whether the condition setting is reasonable.
```

- `COOLDOWN`: the execution priority of the query is lowered to the lowest level. The query continues to execute with the lowest priority and does not occupy resources of other operations.
- `KILL`: the identified query is automatically terminated and reports an error `Query execution was interrupted, identified as runaway query`.

To avoid too many concurrent runaway queries that exhaust system resources before being identified by conditions, the resource control feature introduces a quick identification and immunity mechanism. By using the `WATCH` clause, when a query is identified as a runaway query, the current TiDB instance directly marks the matching queries as runaway queries in the next period of time (defined by `DURATION`), instead of waiting for them to be identified by conditions, and executes the corresponding operations. The `KILL` operation reports an error `Quarantined and interrupted because of being in runaway watch list`.

> There are two ways to match for rapid identification:

Author: ```suggestion
There are two methods for `WATCH` to match for rapid identification:
```

> To avoid too many concurrent runaway queries that exhaust system resources before being identified by conditions, the resource control feature introduces a quick identification and immunity mechanism. By using the `WATCH` clause, when a query is identified as a runaway query, the current TiDB instance directly marks the matching queries as runaway queries in the next period of time (defined by `DURATION`), instead of waiting for them to be identified by conditions, and executes the corresponding operations. The `KILL` operation reports an error `Quarantined and interrupted because of being in runaway watch list`.

Author: ```suggestion
To avoid too many concurrent runaway queries that exhaust system resources before being identified by conditions, the resource control feature introduces an immunity mechanism for quick identification. By using the `WATCH` clause, when a query is identified as a runaway query, the current TiDB instance directly marks the matching queries as runaway queries in the next period of time (defined by `DURATION`), instead of waiting for them to be identified by conditions, and executes the corresponding operations. The `KILL` operation reports an error `Quarantined and interrupted because of being in runaway watch list`.
```

> To avoid too many concurrent runaway queries that exhaust system resources before being identified by conditions, the resource control feature introduces an immunity mechanism for quick identification. By using the `WATCH` clause, when a query is identified as a runaway query, the current TiDB instance directly marks the matching queries as runaway queries in the next period of time (defined by `DURATION`), instead of waiting for them to be identified by conditions, and executes the corresponding operations. The `KILL` operation reports an error `Quarantined and interrupted because of being in runaway watch list`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
To avoid too many concurrent runaway queries that exhaust system resources before being identified by conditions, the resource control feature introduces an immunity mechanism for quick identification. By using the `WATCH` clause, when a query is identified as a runaway query, the current TiDB instance marks the matching queries as runaway queries immediately in the next period of time (defined by `DURATION`), and takes the corresponding actions, instead of waiting for them to be identified by conditions. The `KILL` operation reports an error `Quarantined and interrupted because of being in runaway watch list`.
```

- `EXACT` indicates that only SQL statements with exactly the same SQL are quickly identified.

> - `SIMILAR` indicates that the literal values are ignored and all SQL statements with the same pattern are matched by Plan Digest.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- `SIMILAR` indicates all SQL statements with the same pattern are matched by Plan Digest despite literal values.
```

> The format of `QUERY_LIMIT` is as follows:

Author: ```suggestion
The parameters of `QUERY_LIMIT` are as follows:
```

| Parameter          | Description            | Note                                  |
|---------------|--------------|--------------------------------------|
| `EXEC_ELAPSED`  | When the query execution time exceeds this value, it is identified as a runaway query | EXEC_ELAPSED =`60s` means the query is identified as a runaway query if it takes more than 60 seconds to execute. |
| `ACTION`    | Action taken when a runaway query is identified | The optional values are `DRYRUN`, `COOLDOWN`, and `KILL`. |

> | `WATCH`   | Quickly match the identified runaway query. If the same or similar query is encountered again within a certain period of time and the corresponding action is performed directly. | Optional. For example,`WATCH=SIMILAR DURATION '60s'` and `WATCH=EXACT DURATION '1m'`. |

Author: ```suggestion
| `WATCH`   | Quickly match the identified runaway query. If the same or similar query is encountered again within a certain period of time and the corresponding action is performed directly. | Optional. For example, `WATCH=SIMILAR DURATION '60s'` and `WATCH=EXACT DURATION '1m'`. |
```

> | `WATCH`   | Quickly match the identified runaway query. If the same or similar query is encountered again within a certain period of time and the corresponding action is performed directly. | Optional. For example, `WATCH=SIMILAR DURATION '60s'` and `WATCH=EXACT DURATION '1m'`. |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| `WATCH`   | Quickly match the identified runaway query. If the same or similar query is encountered again within a certain period of time and the corresponding action is performed immediately. | Optional. For example, `WATCH=SIMILAR DURATION '60s'` and `WATCH=EXACT DURATION '1m'`. |
```

#### Examples

1. Create a resource group `rg1` with a quota of 500 RUs per second, and define a runaway query as one that exceeds 60 seconds, and lower the priority of the runaway query.

    ```sql
    CREATE RESOURCE GROUP IF NOT EXISTS rg1 RU_PER_SEC = 500 QUERY_LIMIT=(EXEC_ELAPSED='60s', ACTION=COOLDOWN);
    ```

> 2. Change the `rg1` resource group to terminate the runaway queries directly, and mark the queries with the same pattern as runaway queries directly in the next 10 minutes.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
2. Change the `rg1` resource group to terminate the runaway queries, and mark the queries with the same pattern as runaway queries immediately in the next 10 minutes.
```

    ```sql
    ALTER RESOURCE GROUP rg1 QUERY_LIMIT=(EXEC_ELAPSED='60s', ACTION=KILL, WATCH=SIMILAR DURATION='10m');
    ```

3. Change the `rg1` resource group to cancel the runaway query check.

    ```sql
    ALTER RESOURCE GROUP rg1 QUERY_LIMIT=NULL;
    ```

#### Observability

<CustomContent platform="tidb">

> TiDB collects runtime information about TTL regularly and provides visual charts of the metrics in the Grafana dashboard. You can view the data in the **TiDB** > **TTL** dashboard. For more details, see [TiDB Important Monitoring Metrics](/grafana-tidb-dashboard.md#ttl).

Author: ```suggestion
TiDB collects runtime information about TTL regularly and provides visual charts of the metrics in the Grafana dashboard. You can view the data from **TiDB** > **TTL**. For more details, see [TiDB Important Monitoring Metrics](/grafana-tidb-dashboard.md#ttl).
```

> <CustomContent platform="tidb">
> 
> TiDB collects runtime information about TTL regularly and provides visual charts of the metrics in the Grafana dashboard. You can view the data from **TiDB** > **TTL**. For more details, see [TiDB Important Monitoring Metrics](/grafana-tidb-dashboard.md#ttl).
> 
> </CustomContent>
> 
> <CustomContent platform="tidb-cloud">
> 
> TiDB collects runtime information about TTL regularly and provides visual charts of the metrics in the Grafana dashboard.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```
removed in Chinese doc, it was added by mistake

Author: 这个不能删，是专门为 Cloud 文档设置的。

> 
> </CustomContent>

Author: ```suggestion
```

You can get more information about runaway queries from the following system tables:

+ The `mysql.tidb_runaway_queries` table contains the history of all runaway queries identified in the past certain period of time. Take one of the rows as an example:

    ```sql
    MySQL [(none)]> SELECT * FROM mysql.tidb_runaway_queries LIMIT 1\G;
    *************************** 1. row ***************************
    resource_group_name: rg1
                   time: 2023-06-16 17:40:22
             match_type: identify
                 action: kill
           original_sql: select * from sbtest.sbtest1
            plan_digest: 5b7d445c5756a16f910192ad449c02348656a5e9d2aa61615e6049afbc4a82e
            tidb_server: 127.0.0.1:4000
    ```

>     In which `match_type` is the source of the runaway query. The value can one of the following:

Author: ```suggestion
    In which `match_type` indicates how the runaway query is identified. The value can one of the following:
```

    - `identify` means that it matches the condition of the runaway query.

>     - `watch` means that it is put into the watch list.

Author: ```suggestion
    - `watch` means that it matches the watch rules and is put into the watch list.
```
